Add microarray gene ID conversion example (#212)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 02-microarray/gene-id-annotation_microarray_01_ensembl.Rmd

---
title: "Obtaining Annotation for Ensembl IDs - Microarray"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"
date: "`r format(Sys.time(), '%B %Y')`"
output:   
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

# Purpose of this analysis

> The purpose of this notebook is to provide an example of mapping gene IDs for microarray data obtained from refine.bio using `AnnotationDbi` packages.

Reviewer: Probably should have a citation here too.

all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)

# Bring back the "Gene" column in preparation for mapping
df <- df %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

## Map Ensembl IDs to gene symbols

The `mapIds()` function has a `multiVals` argument which denotes what to do when there are multiple mapped values for a single gene identifier.
The default behavior is to return just the first mapped value.
It is good to keep in mind that various downstream analyses may benefit from varied strategies at this step. 
Use `?mapIds` to see more options or strategies.

In the next chunk, we will run the `mapIds()` function and supply the `multiVals` argument with the `"list"` option in order to get a large list with all the mapped values found for each gene identifier.

```{r}
# Map ensembl IDs to their associated gene symbols
mapped_list <- mapIds(
  org.Mm.eg.db, # Replace with annotation package for the organism relevant to your data
  keys = df$Gene,
  column = "SYMBOL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers you would like to map to
  keytype = "ENSEMBL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers in your data
  multiVals = "list"
)
```

## Explore gene ID conversion

> Now, let's take a look at our mapped object to see how the mapping went.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's take a look at our `mapped_list` to see how the mapping went.
```

# Let's look at the first 6 rows of our `multi_mapped` object
head(multi_mapped)
```

Looks like we have some cases where 3 gene symbols mapped to a single Ensembl ID.
We have a total of 130 out of 17984 Ensembl IDs with multiple mappings to gene symbols.
If we are not too worried about the 130 IDs with multiple mappings, we can filter them out for the purpose of having 1:1 mappings for our downstream analysis.

## Map Ensembl IDs to gene symbols -- filtering out multi mappings

The next code chunk we will rerun the `mapIds()` function, this time supplying the `"filter"` option to the `multiVals` argument.
This will remove all instances of multiple mappings and return a list of only the gene identifiers and symbols that had 1:1 mapping.
Use `?mapIds` to see more options or strategies.

```{r}
# Map ensembl IDs to their associated gene symbols
filtered_mapped_df <- data.frame(
  "Symbol" = mapIds(
    org.Mm.eg.db, # Replace with annotation package for the organism relevant to your data
    keys = df$Gene,
    column = "SYMBOL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers you would like to map to
    keytype = "ENSEMBL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers in your data

>     multiVals = "filter"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    multiVals = "filter" # This will drop any `Gene`s that have multiple matches
```

file.exists(file.path(data_dir, "metadata_GSE13490.tsv"))
```

If the chunk above printed out `FALSE` to either of those tests, you won't be able to run this analysis _as is_ until those files are in the appropriate place.

If the concept of a "file path" is unfamiliar to you; we recommend taking a look at our [section about file paths](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#an-important-note-about-file-paths-and-Rmds). 

# Using a different refine.bio dataset with this analysis?

If you'd like to adapt an example analysis to use a different dataset from [refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/), we recommend placing the files in the `data/` directory you created and changing the filenames and paths in the notebook to match these files (we've put comments to signify where you would need to change the code).
We suggest saving plots and results to `plots/` and `results/` directories, respectively, as these are automatically created by the notebook.
From here you can customize this analysis example to fit your own scientific questions and preferences. 

refine.bio data comes with gene level data with Ensembl IDs. 

> Although this example script uses Ensembl IDs from Mouse, (<i>Mus musculus</i>), to obtain gene symbols this script can be easily converted for use with different species or annotation types <i>eg</i> protein IDs, gene ontology, accession numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although this example notebook uses Ensembl IDs from Mouse, (<i>Mus musculus</i>), to obtain gene symbols this notebook can be easily converted for use with different species or annotation types <i>eg</i> protein IDs, gene ontology, accession numbers.
```

<b>For different species</b>, wherever the abbreviation `org.Mm.eg.db` or `Mm` is written, it must be replaced with the respective species abbreviation <i>eg</i> for<i> Homo sapiens</i> `org.Hs.eg.db` or `Hs` would be used.

> In the case of our [RNA-seq gene identifier annotation example notebook](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/blob/master/03-rnaseq/gene-id-convert_rnaseq_01_ensembl.Rmd), a Zebrafish (<i>Danio rerio</i>) dataset is used, meaning `org.Dr.eg.db` or `Dr` would also need to be used there.

Reviewer: I know its' not ready yet, but we should probably have this go to the html instead of the Rmd.

A full list of the annotation R packages from Bioconductor is at this [link](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/BiocViews.html#___AnnotationData) [@annotation-packages].

***

<!-- Do not delete this line --> <a name="analysis" style="padding-top:56px;margin-top:-56px;">&nbsp;</a>

# Obtaining Annotation for Ensembl IDs - Microarray

Ensembl IDs can be used to obtain various different annotations at the gene/transcript level.
Let's get ready to use the Ensembl IDs from our mouse dataset to obtain the associated gene symbols.

## Install libraries

See our Getting Started page with [instructions for package installation](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#what-you-need-to-install) for a list of the other software you will need, as well as more tips and resources.

> In this analysis, we will be using the `org.Mm.eg.db` R package [@Carlson2019].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this analysis, we will be using the `org.Mm.eg.db` R package [@Carlson2019].
[Other species can be used](#using-a-different-refinebio-dataset-with-this-analysis). 
```

# We will need this so we can use the pipe: %>%
library(magrittr)
```

## Import and set up data

Data downloaded from refine.bio include a metadata tab separated values (TSV) file and a data TSV file. 
This chunk of code will read the both TSV files and add them as data frames to your environment.

```{r}
# Read in metadata TSV file
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_GSE13490.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE13490.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene ID column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)

# Bring back the "Gene" column in preparation for mapping
df <- df %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

## Map Ensembl IDs to gene symbols

> This code chunk will return a message that indicates that there are many mappings between our keys and columns but this is okay and is what we expect in most cases since genes and transcripts do not have a 1:1 relationship.

Reviewer: This message will change depending on the `multiVals` argument, so we either need to reframe this sentence or delete it. If we do keep it, we should put it after the user would see this message.

> The `mapIds()` function has a `multiVals` argument which denotes what to do when there are multiple mapped values for a single gene identifier.

Reviewer: I like this section! Great!

It is good to keep in mind that various downstream analyses may benefit from varied strategies at this step. 
Use `?mapIds` to see more options or strategies.

In the next chunk, we will run the `mapIds()` function and supply the `multiVals` argument with the `"list"` option in order to get a large list with all the mapped values found for each gene identifier.

```{r}
# Map ensembl IDs to their associated gene symbols
mapped_list <- mapIds(
  org.Mm.eg.db, # Replace with annotation package for the organism relevant to your data
  keys = df$Gene,
  column = "SYMBOL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers you would like to map to
  keytype = "ENSEMBL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers in your data
  multiVals = "list"
)
```

## Explore gene ID conversion

Now, let's take a look at our mapped object to see how the mapping went.

```{r}
# Let's use the `head()` function to take a preview at our mapped list
head(mapped_list)
```

It looks like we have gene symbols that were successfully mapped to the Ensembl IDs we provided.
However, the data is now in a `list` object, making it a little more difficult to explore.

> We are going to turn our list object into a data frame object in the next chunk.

Reviewer: Nice! I like this too!

```{r}
# Let's make our object a bit more manageable for exploration by turning it into a data frame using the `reshape2::melt()` function
mapped_df <- mapped_list %>%

>   reshape2::melt()

Reviewer: I *think* you can use the `value` arugment to name what you'd like the column to be called, but you'd have to try that. I think we should either do that or use `rename()` so its clear what these columns are.

```

Now let's take a peek at our data frame.

```{r}
head(mapped_df)
```

We can see that our data frame has a new column `value`.
Let's get a summary of the gene symbols returned in the `value` column of our mapped data frame.

```{r}
# We can use the `summary()` function to get a better idea of the distribution of symbols in the `value` column
summary(mapped_df$value)
```

There are 998 NA's in our data frame, which means that 998 out of the 17918 Ensembl IDs did not map to gene symbols.
998 out of 17918 is not too bad a rate, in our opinion, but note that different gene identifier types will have different mapping rates and that is to be expected.
Regardless, it is always good to be aware of how many genes you are potentially "losing" if you rely on this new gene identifier you've mapped to for downstream analyses.

However, if you have almost all NA's it is possible that the function was executed incorrectly or you may want to consider using a different gene identifier, if possible.

Now let's check to see if we have any genes that were mapped to multiple symbols.

```{r}
multi_mapped <- mapped_df %>%
  # Let's group by the Ensembl ID's in the `L1` column

>   dplyr::group_by(L1) %>%

Reviewer: Yeah, we might want to rename `L1` before we get to this step.

  # Create a new variable containing the number of symbols mapped to each ID
  dplyr::mutate(gene_symbol_count = dplyr::n()) %>%
  # Arrange by the genes with the highest number of symbols mapped
  dplyr::arrange(desc(gene_symbol_count)) %>%
  # Filter to include only the rows with multi mappings
  dplyr::filter(gene_symbol_count > 1)

# Let's look at the first 6 rows of our `multi_mapped` object
head(multi_mapped)
```

Looks like we have some cases where 3 gene symbols mapped to a single Ensembl ID.
We have a total of 130 out of 17984 Ensembl IDs with multiple mappings to gene symbols.

> We are not too worried about the 130 IDs with multiple mappings, so we will filter them out for the purpose of having 1:1 mappings for our downstream analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we are not too worried about the 130 IDs with multiple mappings, we can filter them out for the purpose of having 1:1 mappings for our downstream analysis.
```

## Map Ensembl IDs to gene symbols -- filtering out multi mappings

> The next code chunk will rerun the `mapIds()` function, this time supplying the `"filter"` option to the `multiVals` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next code chunk we will rerun the `mapIds()` function, this time supplying the `"filter"` option to the `multiVals` argument.
```

This will remove all instances of multiple mappings and return a list of only the gene identifiers and symbols that had 1:1 mapping.
Use `?mapIds` to see more options or strategies.

```{r}
# Map ensembl IDs to their associated gene symbols
filtered_mapped_df <- mapIds(
  org.Mm.eg.db, # Replace with annotation package for the organism relevant to your data
  keys = df$Gene,
  column = "SYMBOL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers you would like to map to
  keytype = "ENSEMBL", # Replace with the type of gene identifiers in your data
  multiVals = "filter"
) %>%
  # Turn our list into a data frame

>   reshape2::melt() %>%

Reviewer: I might be wrong, but I don't think this melt is necessary, I *think* you should be able to put this straight into a data frame since it should be the same length as the original data.

  # Now let's give the `value` column a name that is more relevant to the values it holds

>   dplyr::rename("Symbol" = "value")

Reviewer: Yes, this bit, can we do this above?

```

> Let's copy the same code we used above to see if we have any multi mappings in our new data frame.

Reviewer: I don't like copying the code. I also don't think this step is necessary. We can trust `mapIds()` will work as advertised. Plus this notebook has gotten a tad long. I would go straight to writing to TSV and call it a day.

  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene") %>%
  # Let's group by the Ensembl ID's in the `L1` column
  dplyr::group_by(Gene) %>%
  # Create a new variable containing the number of symbols mapped to each ID
  dplyr::mutate(gene_symbol_count = dplyr::n()) %>%
  # Arrange by the genes with the highest number of symbols mapped
  dplyr::arrange(desc(gene_symbol_count)) %>%
  # Filter to include only the rows with multi mappings
  dplyr::filter(gene_symbol_count > 1)
```

This new new `filtered_mapped_df` object is empty, as expected, since it has been filtered to include only 1:1 mappings.

Now, let's write our filtered and mapped results to file!

## Write mapped results to file

```{r Write to file}
# Write mapped and annotated data frame to output file
readr::write_tsv(filtered_mapped_df, file.path(
  results_dir,
  "GSE13490_Gene_Symbols.tsv" # Replace with a relevant output file name
))
```

# Resources for further learning

- Marc Carlson has prepared a nice [Introduction to Bioconductor Annotation Packages](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/AnnotationDbi/inst/doc/IntroToAnnotationPackages.pdf) [@Carlson2020]

> - [More on Annotation mapping functions](https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/AnnotationFuncs/inst/doc/AnnotationFuncsUserguide.pdf) [@Edwards2020]

Reviewer: I wouldn't share this alternative annotation package's user guide, I find it more confusing than helpful. Easier just to share AnnotationDbi user guide tutorials as opposed to sending our users to something else that they would have to learn from scratch.

Author: Gotcha, that makes sense. I removed this reference but haven't found any additional user guide tutorials thus far, do you have any suggestions or personal favorites for this particular case?

Reviewer: I don't think I have anything else. We can add more if we find something.

Looks like we have some cases where 3 gene symbols mapped to a single Ensembl ID.
We have a total of 130 out of 17984 Ensembl IDs with multiple mappings to gene symbols.
If we are not too worried about the 130 IDs with multiple mappings, we can filter them out for the purpose of having 1:1 mappings for our downstream analysis.

## Map Ensembl IDs to gene symbols -- filtering out multi mappings

> The next code we chunk we will rerun the `mapIds()` function, this time supplying the `"filter"` option to the `multiVals` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next code chunk we will rerun the `mapIds()` function, this time supplying the `"filter"` option to the `multiVals` argument.
```

This will remove all instances of multiple mappings and return a list of only the gene identifiers and symbols that had 1:1 mapping.
Use `?mapIds` to see more options or strategies.

```{r}
# Map ensembl IDs to their associated gene symbols

> filtered_mapped_df <- data.frame(

Reviewer: Should probably save `data` with it too.

> filtered_mapped_df <- data.frame(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filtered_mapped_df <- data.frame(
     df, 
```
This isn't formatted properly, but you get the idea.

Author: @cansavvy, I get an error here due to the difference in length between `df` (nrows = 17918) and the results in `filtered_mapped_df` (nrows = 17854). Do you think we should pull the genes out of the rownames and do an `inner_join` here?

Reviewer: Oh of course. Forgot about that. Will need an inner_join. I can take a look after add that if you want.

Author: Okay @cansavvy, you can take a look at the `inner_join` step and let me know if I need to make any changes 👍
